website/integrations: add appflowy (#16499)
goauthentik/authentik: website/integrations/documentation/appflowy/index.md

---
title: Integrate with AppFlowy
sidebar_label: AppFlowy
support_level: community
---

## What is AppFlowy

> AppFlowy is an open-source workspace collaboration platform (similar to Notion) that lets teams create, manage, and collaborate on documents, databases, and projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> AppFlowy is an open-source workspace collaboration platform (similar to Notion) that lets teams create, manage, and collaborate on documents, databases, and projects.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 
```

> -- https://appflowy.com

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> -- https://appflowy.com
```

> [AppFlowy](https://www.appflowy.io/) is an open-source workspace collaboration platform (similar to Notion) that lets teams create, manage, and collaborate on documents, databases, and projects.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> AppFlowy is an open-source workspace collaboration platform (similar to Notion) that lets teams create, manage, and collaborate on documents, databases, and projects.
> 
> -- https://www.appflowy.io
```

> This guide explains how to configure AppFlowy Cloud to enable secure login using SAML 2.0 authentication with authentik.

Reviewer: Please remove this line

## Preparation

The following placeholders are used in this guide:

- `appflowy.company` is the FQDN of the AppFlowy installation.
- `authentik.company` is the FQDN of the authentik installation.

:::note
This documentation lists only the settings that you need to change from their default values. Be aware that any changes other than those explicitly mentioned in this guide could cause issues accessing your application.
:::

## authentik configuration

To support the integration of AppFlowy with authentik, you need to create a certificate and an application/provider pair in authentik.

### Create a certificate-key pair

1. From the authentik Admin interface, navigate to **System** > **Certificates** and click **Generate**.

> 2. In the dialog:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Set the following required configuration items:
```

Don't like the word items here, but i guess we're stuck with this for now

>    - **Common name**: `AppFlowyCertSAML` (example)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - **Common name**: set an appropriate name (For example: `AppFlowyCertSAML).
```

> 1. In authentik, go to **System → Certificates** and click **Generate**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. From the authentik Admin interface, navigate to **System** > **Certificates** and click **Generate**.
```

>    - **Validity days**: leave default (`365`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - **Validity days**: set an appropriate certificate validity period (or keep the default value of `365`).
```

   - **Private key algorithm**: `RSA`

>    - Click **Generate**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 3. Download the **Certificate** and **Private key**. These will be needed later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Click **Generate** and take note of the **Certificate** and **Private key** values as they will be required later on.
```

### Create an application and provider in authentik

> 1. Go to **Applications → Applications** and click **Create with Provider**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Log in to authentik as an administrator, and open the authentik Admin interface.
2. Navigate to **Applications** > **Applications** and click **Create with Provider** to create an application and provider pair. (Alternatively you can first create a provider separately, then create the application and connect it with the provider.)
```

> 2. Application:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Application: provide a descriptive name, an optional group for the type of application, the policy engine mode, and optional UI settings.
```

>    - **Name**: `AppFlowy` (slug will auto-complete)

Reviewer: This line can be removed

>    - **Launch URL**: leave empty (authentik will auto-detect)

Reviewer: This line can be removed

>    - Click **Next**

Reviewer: This line can be removed

> 3. **Choose a Provider type**: select **SAML Provider**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Choose a Provider type**: select **SAML Provider** as the provider type.
```

   - **Name**: `Provider for AppFlowy`
   - **Authorization flow**: `default-provider-authorization-explicit-consent`
   - **Protocol settings**:
     - **ACS URL**: `https://appflowy.company/gotrue/sso/saml/acs`
     - **Issuer**: `authentik`
     - **Service Provider Binding**: `Post`
     - **Audience**: `https://appflowy.company/gotrue/sso/saml/metadata`
   - **Advanced flow settings**:
     - **Authentication flow**: `default-authentication-flow`
     - **Invalidation flow**: `default-provider-invalidation-flow`
   - **Advanced protocol settings**:
     - **Signing certificate**: select the certificate created earlier
     - **Sign assertions**: enabled
     - **Sign responses**: enabled
     - **Verification certificate**: select the same certificate
     - **NameID Property Mapping**: `authentik default SAML Mapping: Email`
     - **Default relay state**: `https://appflowy.company/auth/callback`

>      - **Signature algorithm**: `RSA-SHA256` (default)

Reviewer: let' not include variables which are the default

6. **Configure Bindings** (optional): create [bindings](/docs/add-secure-apps/flows-stages/bindings/) (policy, group, or user) to manage which users see and can access AppFlowy on **My Applications**.
7. Click **Submit** to create the application and provider.
7. Navigate to **Applications → Providers → Provider for AppFlowy** and keep this page open to retrieve the SSO (POST) URL and metadata URL later.

> ## Service configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## AppFlowy configuration
```

Configure AppFlowy Cloud to use authentik as its SAML IdP.

### Convert the certificate and private key

AppFlowy requires the private key in PKCS#1 and base64 (single-line) format.

> 1. Convert the private key to PKCS#1 (the `-traditional` flag is required with recent OpenSSL versions):

Reviewer: As we can't assume that users use Linux or MacOS, we should also include powershell. I'd suggest 2 categories: "Windows" and "Unix-like".

You can see documentation for tabs here: https://docs.goauthentik.io/developer-docs/docs/style-guide/#tabs-for-multiple-configurations

Reviewer: these powershell commands *should* technically be right

step 1:
unix: 
```
openssl rsa -in AppFlowyCertSAML_private_key.pem -traditional -out key_pkcs1.pem
```
powershell: 
```
openssl rsa -in AppFlowyCertSAML_private_key.pem -traditional -out key_pkcs1.pem
```

step 2:
unix:
```
sed -n '/^-----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----$/,/^-----END RSA PRIVATE KEY-----$/p' key_pkcs1.pem \
  | grep -v '^-----' \
  | tr -d '\n'
```
powershell:
```
(Get-Content key_pkcs1.pem) -join "`n" `
  | Select-String -Pattern '^-{5}' -NotMatch `
  | ForEach-Object { $_ -replace '\s','' } `
  | ForEach-Object { $_ } `
  | Out-String -Stream | ForEach-Object { $_.Trim() }
```

step 3:
unix:
```
awk 'NF {sub(/\r/, ""); printf "%s\\n",$0}' AppFlowyCertSAML_certificate.pem
```
powershell:
```
(Get-Content AppFlowyCertSAML_certificate.pem) `
  | ForEach-Object { ($_ -replace "`r","") + "\n" } `
  | Out-String -Stream `
  | ForEach-Object { $_.TrimEnd() } `
  | ForEach-Object { $_ -replace "`n", "\\n" }
```

Reviewer: don't forget to use \`\`\`sh and \`\`\`powershell for syntax highlighting 😉

   sed -n '/^-----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----$/,/^-----END RSA PRIVATE KEY-----$/p' key_pkcs1.pem      | grep -v '^-----'      | tr -d '\n'
   ```
   Copy this output for `GOTRUE_SAML_PRIVATE_KEY`.
3. Convert the certificate to a single-line format with `\n` escapes:
   ```bash
   awk 'NF {sub(/\r/, ""); printf "%s\\n",$0}' AppFlowyCertSAML_certificate.pem
   ```
   Copy this output for `AUTH_SAML_CERT`.

### Configure the `.env` file in AppFlowy

In the AppFlowy root installation directory, update the `.env` file:

```bash
AUTH_SAML_ENABLED=true
GOTRUE_SAML_ENABLED=true

# Paste the SSO URL (POST binding) from authentik's "Provider for AppFlowy"
AUTH_SAML_ENTRY_POINT="https://authentik.company/application/saml/appflowy/sso/binding/post"

AUTH_SAML_ISSUER="authentik"
AUTH_SAML_CALLBACK_URL="https://appflowy.company/gotrue/sso/saml/acs"
AUTH_SAML_DEFAULT_REDIRECT_URL="https://appflowy.company/app"

# From the conversion steps above
GOTRUE_SAML_PRIVATE_KEY="<Base64 private key (single line)>"
AUTH_SAML_CERT="<Certificate with \\n escapes (single line)>"
```

:::note
Ensure `GOTRUE_DISABLE_SIGNUP=false` so first-time SAML users can sign in.
:::

Restart the AppFlowy services.

> ### Configure SAML SSO in the AppFlowy Admin Dashboard

Reviewer: According to the docs, you should set it in admin ui before updating env vars. so this and above should be switched around

### Configure SAML SSO in the AppFlowy Admin Dashboard

1. In authentik, open **Applications → Providers → Provider for AppFlowy**.
2. Under **Metadata related objects**, copy the **download URL** (metadata URL).
3. Open the AppFlowy Admin Console at `https://appflowy.company/console` and sign in.
4. Go to **Admin → Create SSO**.
5. Paste the **Metadata URL** from authentik.
6. Click **Create**.

## Configuration verification

To confirm that authentik is properly configured with AppFlowy, log out and log back in by clicking the **AppFlowy** application on your authentik user dashboard. You should be automatically redirected and signed into AppFlowy via SSO.

> 

Reviewer: Please add a References section listing the sources for this guide; you can use this as example: https://integrations.goauthentik.io/security/bitwarden/#resources

> ---

Reviewer: Please remove this line

> *Tested with AppFlowy Cloud `0.9.64`.*

Reviewer: Please remove this line

> To confirm that authentik is properly configured with AppFlowy, log out and log back in by clicking the **AppFlowy** application on your authentik user dashboard. You should be automatically redirected and signed into AppFlowy via SSO.

Reviewer: Would it be possible to log in by clicking a button in the appflowy login page instead or do we need to pass by authentik

> To confirm that authentik is properly configured with AppFlowy, log out and log back in by clicking the **AppFlowy** application on your authentik user dashboard. You should be automatically redirected and signed into AppFlowy via SSO.

Reviewer: if we need to pass by authentik:

```suggestion
To confirm that authentik is properly configured with AppFlowy, log out and then log back in by selecting the **AppFlowy** application from the authentik User interface. You should be automatically redirected and signed in to AppFlowy.
```

Reviewer: Wether AppFlowy should be bolded is another story. Since we don't set the application name anywhere

> - [Appflowy Documentation - How to login using Okta SAML 2.0](https://appflowy.com/docs/How-to-log-in-using-Okta-SAML-2)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [AppFlowy Documentation - How to login using Okta SAML 2.0](https://appflowy.com/docs/How-to-log-in-using-Okta-SAML-2)
```

To match product naming

> - [Appflowy Documentation - How to login using SAML 2.0](https://appflowy.com/docs/How-to-log-in-using-SAML-2)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [AppFlowy Documentation - How to login using SAML 2.0](https://appflowy.com/docs/How-to-log-in-using-SAML-2)
```

---
title: Integrate with AppFlowy
sidebar_label: AppFlowy
support_level: community
---

> import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";

Reviewer: needs .mdx

            - **Sign assertions**: enabled
            - **Sign responses**: enabled
            - **Verification certificate**: select the same certificate
            - **NameID Property Mapping**: `authentik default SAML Mapping: Email`
            - **Default relay state**: `https://appflowy.company/auth/callback`
    - **Configure Bindings** _(optional)_: you can create a [binding](/docs/add-secure-apps/flows-stages/bindings/) (policy, group, or user) to manage the listing and access to applications on a user's **My applications** page.
3. Click **Submit** to create the application and provider.

### Copy metadata download link

1. Log in to authentik as an administrator, and open the authentik Admin interface.
2. Navigate to **Applications** > **Providers** and click on the name of the provider that you created in the previous section.
3. Under **Related objects** > **Metadata**, click on **Copy download URL**. This URL is your **SAML Metadata URL** and it will be required in the next section.

## AppFlowy configuration

Configure AppFlowy Cloud to use authentik as its SAML IdP.

### Convert the certificate and private key

> AppFlowy requires the private key in PKCS#1 and base64 (single-line) format so you'll need to convert the certificate and private key to these formats.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AppFlowy requires the private key in [PKCS#1](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PKCS_1) and base64 (single-line) format, so you'll need to convert the certificate and private key to these formats.
```

```

The output of this command will be required for the `AUTH_SAML_CERT` value in a later section.

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="windows" label="Windows">

1.  Convert the private key to PKCS#1:

```powershell
openssl rsa -in AppFlowyCertSAML_private_key.pem -traditional -out key_pkcs1.pem
```

2. Convert the PKCS#1 private key to a single-line base64 string:

```powershell
(Get-Content key_pkcs1.pem) -join "`n" `
  | Select-String -Pattern '^-{5}' -NotMatch `
  | ForEach-Object { $_ -replace '\s','' } `
  | ForEach-Object { $_ } `
  | Out-String -Stream | ForEach-Object { $_.Trim() }
```

3. Convert the certificate to a single-line format with `\n` escapes:

```powershell
(Get-Content AppFlowyCertSAML_certificate.pem) `
  | ForEach-Object { ($_ -replace "`r","") + "\n" } `
  | Out-String -Stream `
  | ForEach-Object { $_.TrimEnd() } `
  | ForEach-Object { $_ -replace "`n", "\\n" }
```

The output of this command will be required for the `AUTH_SAML_CERT` value in a later section.

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Configure Metadata URL

1. Log in the AppFlowy Admin Console at `https://appflowy.company/console`.
2. Navigate to **Admin** > **Create SSO**.

> 3. Set the **Metadata URL** field to the SAML Metadata URL from authentik.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Set the **Metadata URL** to the **SAML Metadata URL** from authentik.
```

4. Click **Create**.

### Configure AppFlowy environment file

Add the following lines to the `.env` file in the root directory of your AppFlowy installation:

```bash
AUTH_SAML_ENABLED=true
GOTRUE_SAML_ENABLED=true

# Paste the SSO URL (POST binding) from authentik's "Provider for AppFlowy"
AUTH_SAML_ENTRY_POINT="https://authentik.company/application/saml/appflowy/sso/binding/post"

AUTH_SAML_ISSUER="authentik"
AUTH_SAML_CALLBACK_URL="https://appflowy.company/gotrue/sso/saml/acs"
AUTH_SAML_DEFAULT_REDIRECT_URL="https://appflowy.company/app"

# From the conversion steps above
GOTRUE_SAML_PRIVATE_KEY="<Base64 private key (single line)>"

> AUTH_SAML_CERT="<Certificate with \\n escapes (single line)>"

Reviewer: intentional*
